# sanger-tol/curationpretext: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

<!-- TODO nf-core: Write this documentation describing your workflow's output -->

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Generate Accessories](#generate-accessories) - Raw read QC
- [Generate Maps](#generate-maps) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

### Generate-Accessories

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `accessoriy_files/`
  - `coverage.bigWig`: Graph file containing coverage data. For Pretext ingestion.
  - `halfcoverage.bigWig`: Graph file containing coverage data where coverage is equal to half the max.
  - `maxcoverage.bigWig`: Graph file containing coverage data where coverage is max.
  - `*_gap.bedgraph`: Bed graph with locations of gaps in the sequence. For Pretext ingestion.
  - `*_telomere.bed`: Bed file containing telomeric motif site.
  - `*_telomere.bedgraph`: Bed graph with locations of telomeric motif. For Pretext ingestion.
  - `*_repeat_density.bigWig`: Graph file containing relative repeat density across the genome. For Pretext ingestion.
  </details>

The accessory files are generated in the `ALL_FILES` sub workflow, and are generated in order to be ingested into the pretext files which is detailed on the pipelines website.

### Generate-Maps

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pretext_maps/`
  - `hic_hr.pretext`: A Hi-Res pretext file generated by PretextMap.
  - `hic_normal.pretext`: The standard pretext file generated by PretextMap.
  - `hic_normalFullMap.png`: A static image of the normal.pretext file.

</details>

These files are always generated by the pipeline and viewed in PretextView ( a gui for pretext map manipulation ). As the viewing of the pretext files can be memory intensive to load, we also generate a png for a quick glance.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
